README.md, before:

MicroMachine
============

Minimal Finite State Machine.

Description
-----------

There are many finite state machine implementations for Ruby, and they
all provide a nice DSL for declaring events, exceptions, callbacks,
and all kinds of niceties in general.

But if all you want is a finite state machine, look no further: this
has less than 50 lines of code and provides everything a finite state
machine must have, and nothing more.

Usage
-----

``` ruby
require 'micromachine'

machine = MicroMachine.new(:new) # Initial state.

# Define the possible transitions for each event.
machine.when(:confirm, :new => :confirmed)
machine.when(:ignore, :new => :ignored)
machine.when(:reset, :confirmed => :new, :ignored => :new)

machine.trigger(:confirm)  #=> true
machine.state              #=> :confirmed

machine.trigger(:ignore)   #=> false
machine.state              #=> :confirmed

machine.trigger(:reset)    #=> true
machine.state              #=> :new

machine.trigger(:ignore)   #=> true
machine.state              #=> :ignored
```

The `when` helper is syntactic sugar for assigning to the
`transitions_for` hash. This code is equivalent:

``` ruby
machine.transitions_for[:confirm] = { :new => :confirmed }
machine.transitions_for[:ignore]  = { :new => :ignored }
machine.transitions_for[:reset]   = { :confirmed => :new, :ignored => :new }
```

You can also ask if an event will trigger a change in state. Following
the example above:

``` ruby
machine.state              #=> :ignored

machine.trigger?(:ignore)  #=> false
machine.trigger?(:reset)   #=> true

# And the state is preserved, because you were only asking.
machine.state              #=> :ignored
```

If you want to force an Exception when trying to trigger a event from a
non compatible state use the `trigger!` method:

``` ruby
machine.trigger?(:ignore)  #=> false
machine.trigger!(:ignore)  #=> MicroMachine::InvalidState raised
```

It can also have callbacks when entering some state:

``` ruby
machine.on(:confirmed) do
  puts "Confirmed"
end
```

Or callbacks on any transition:

``` ruby
machine.on(:any) do
  puts "Transitioned..."
end
```

Note that `:any` is a special key. Using it as a state when declaring
transitions will give you unexpected results.

Check the examples directory for more information.

Adding MicroMachine to your models
----------------------------------

The most popular pattern among Ruby libraries that tackle this problem
is to extend the model and transform it into a finite state machine.
Instead of working as a mixin, MicroMachine's implementation is by
composition: you instantiate a finite state machine (or many!) inside
your model and you are in charge of querying and persisting the state.
Here's an example of how to use it with an ActiveRecord model:

``` ruby
class Event < ActiveRecord::Base
  before_save :persist_confirmation

  def confirm!
    confirmation.trigger(:confirm)
  end

  def cancel!
    confirmation.trigger(:cancel)
  end

  def reset!
    confirmation.trigger(:reset)
  end

  def confirmation
    @confirmation ||= begin
      fsm = MicroMachine.new(confirmation_state || "pending")

      fsm.when(:confirm, "pending" => "confirmed")
      fsm.when(:cancel, "confirmed" => "cancelled")
      fsm.when(:reset, "confirmed" => "pending", "cancelled" => "pending")

      fsm
    end
  end

private

  def persist_confirmation
    self.confirmation_state = confirmation.state
  end
end
```

This example asumes you have a `:confirmation_state` attribute in your
model. This may look like a very verbose implementation, but you gain a
lot in flexibility.

An alternative approach, using callbacks:

``` ruby
class Event < ActiveRecord::Base
  def confirm!
    confirmation.trigger(:confirm)
  end

  def cancel!
    confirmation.trigger(:cancel)
  end

  def reset!
    confirmation.trigger(:reset)
  end

  def confirmation
    @confirmation ||= begin
      fsm = MicroMachine.new(confirmation_state || "pending")

      fsm.when(:confirm, "pending" => "confirmed")
      fsm.when(:cancel, "confirmed" => "cancelled")
      fsm.when(:reset, "confirmed" => "pending", "cancelled" => "pending")

      fsm.on(:any) { self.confirmation_state = confirmation.state }

      fsm
    end
  end
end
```

Now, on any transition the `confirmation_state` attribute in the model
will be updated.

Installation
------------

    $ sudo gem install micromachine

License
-------

Copyright (c) 2009 Michel Martens

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Show how to check events or states

README.md, after:

MicroMachine
============

Minimal Finite State Machine.

Description
-----------

There are many finite state machine implementations for Ruby, and they
all provide a nice DSL for declaring events, exceptions, callbacks,
and all kinds of niceties in general.

But if all you want is a finite state machine, look no further: this
has less than 50 lines of code and provides everything a finite state
machine must have, and nothing more.

Usage
-----

``` ruby
require 'micromachine'

machine = MicroMachine.new(:new) # Initial state.

# Define the possible transitions for each event.
machine.when(:confirm, :new => :confirmed)
machine.when(:ignore, :new => :ignored)
machine.when(:reset, :confirmed => :new, :ignored => :new)

machine.trigger(:confirm)  #=> true
machine.state              #=> :confirmed

machine.trigger(:ignore)   #=> false
machine.state              #=> :confirmed

machine.trigger(:reset)    #=> true
machine.state              #=> :new

machine.trigger(:ignore)   #=> true
machine.state              #=> :ignored
```

The `when` helper is syntactic sugar for assigning to the
`transitions_for` hash. This code is equivalent:

``` ruby
machine.transitions_for[:confirm] = { :new => :confirmed }
machine.transitions_for[:ignore]  = { :new => :ignored }
machine.transitions_for[:reset]   = { :confirmed => :new, :ignored => :new }
```

You can also ask if an event will trigger a change in state. Following
the example above:

``` ruby
machine.state              #=> :ignored

machine.trigger?(:ignore)  #=> false
machine.trigger?(:reset)   #=> true

# And the state is preserved, because you were only asking.
machine.state              #=> :ignored
```

If you want to force an Exception when trying to trigger a event from a
non compatible state use the `trigger!` method:

``` ruby
machine.trigger?(:ignore)  #=> false
machine.trigger!(:ignore)  #=> MicroMachine::InvalidState raised
```

It can also have callbacks when entering some state:

``` ruby
machine.on(:confirmed) do
  puts "Confirmed"
end
```

Or callbacks on any transition:

``` ruby
machine.on(:any) do
  puts "Transitioned..."
end
```

Note that `:any` is a special key. Using it as a state when declaring
transitions will give you unexpected results.

Finally, you can list possible events or states:

``` ruby
machine.events #=> [:confirm, :ignore, :reset]
machine.states #=> [:new, :confirmed, :ignored]
```

Check the examples directory for more information.

Adding MicroMachine to your models
----------------------------------

The most popular pattern among Ruby libraries that tackle this problem
is to extend the model and transform it into a finite state machine.
Instead of working as a mixin, MicroMachine's implementation is by
composition: you instantiate a finite state machine (or many!) inside
your model and you are in charge of querying and persisting the state.
Here's an example of how to use it with an ActiveRecord model:

``` ruby
class Event < ActiveRecord::Base
  before_save :persist_confirmation

  def confirm!
    confirmation.trigger(:confirm)
  end

  def cancel!
    confirmation.trigger(:cancel)
  end

  def reset!
    confirmation.trigger(:reset)
  end

  def confirmation
    @confirmation ||= begin
      fsm = MicroMachine.new(confirmation_state || "pending")

      fsm.when(:confirm, "pending" => "confirmed")
      fsm.when(:cancel, "confirmed" => "cancelled")
      fsm.when(:reset, "confirmed" => "pending", "cancelled" => "pending")

      fsm
    end
  end

private

  def persist_confirmation
    self.confirmation_state = confirmation.state
  end
end
```

This example asumes you have a `:confirmation_state` attribute in your
model. This may look like a very verbose implementation, but you gain a
lot in flexibility.

An alternative approach, using callbacks:

``` ruby
class Event < ActiveRecord::Base
  def confirm!
    confirmation.trigger(:confirm)
  end

  def cancel!
    confirmation.trigger(:cancel)
  end

  def reset!
    confirmation.trigger(:reset)
  end

  def confirmation
    @confirmation ||= begin
      fsm = MicroMachine.new(confirmation_state || "pending")

      fsm.when(:confirm, "pending" => "confirmed")
      fsm.when(:cancel, "confirmed" => "cancelled")
      fsm.when(:reset, "confirmed" => "pending", "cancelled" => "pending")

      fsm.on(:any) { self.confirmation_state = confirmation.state }

      fsm
    end
  end
end
```

Now, on any transition the `confirmation_state` attribute in the model
will be updated.

Installation
------------

    $ sudo gem install micromachine

License
-------

Copyright (c) 2009 Michel Martens

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
